Verify Tutorial 5: Common Types and Functions (#540)
o1-labs/docs2: docs/zkapps/tutorials/05-common-types-and-functions.mdx

title: 'Tutorial 5: Common Types and Functions'
hide_title: true
sidebar_label: 'Tutorial 5: Common Types and Functions'

> description: Higher-order types are built from Fields. Create custom types to build your own strings. Create compound data types with the Struct.

Reviewer: > Create custom types to build your own strings

I think we should slightly change this, since this tutorial isn't only about strings, its more about common data types, functions and how to compose and use them

:::

# Tutorial 5: Common Types and Functions

In previous tutorials, you learned how to deploy smart contracts to the network interact with them from a React UI and NodeJS.

In this tutorial, you learn about types you can use when building with SnarkyJS. Earlier tutorials mostly use the `Field` type. SnarkyJS provides other higher-order types built from Fields that are useful for zkApp development and expand the possibilities for more applications.

All types are defined in the [SnarkyJS / Modules / Types](/zkapps/snarkyjs-reference/modules/Types) API reference documentation.

> The [example project](https://github.com/o1-labs/docs2/tree/main/examples/zkapps/05-common-types-and-functions/src) includes a [main.ts](https://github.com/o1-labs/docs2/blob/main/examples/zkapps/05-common-types-and-functions/src/main.ts) file that shows all of the concepts presented in this tutorial, along with smart contracts showing more advanced usage of some of the concepts, particularly Merkle Trees.

Author: are all concepts in the main.ts file?

Reviewer: yup!

## More Advanced Types

Four advanced types are:

- [CircuitString](../snarkyjs-reference/classes/CircuitString)
- [PrivateKey](../snarkyjs-reference/classes/PrivateKey)
- [PublicKey](../snarkyjs-reference/classes/Types.PublicKey)
- [Signature](../snarkyjs-reference/classes/Signature)

> All arguments passed into smart contracts must be arguments SnarkyJS can consume. You cannot pass normal strings. Instead, you must pass in strings that are wrapped to be compatible with circuits. This is accomplished with `Struct`.

Reviewer: > You cannot pass normal strings

I would rephrase this to 

> You cannot pass normal JavaScript-native types, such as strings, number, boolean or bigint

so this is more general and doesn't just focus on strings

Reviewer: same here

>strings that are wrapped to be compatible with circuits

largest: 22
```

Both branches are executed when using `Provable.if`, like in a JavaScript ternary. Because SnarkyJS is creating a zk circuit, there is no primitive for `if` statements where only one branch is executed.

## Assertions and Constraints

SnarkyJS functions are compiled to generate circuits.

> When a transaction is proven in SnarkyJS, the proof is that the program logic is computed according to the written program, and all assertions are holding true.

Author: With this rewrite, we avoid having SnarkyJS do things.
Anthropomorphism guidance (don't do it) https://developers.google.com/style/anthropomorphism 

what other language can we use?

In previous tutorials, you learned `a.assertEquals(b)`. The `.assertTrue()` is available on the Bool class.

Circuits in SnarkyJS have a fixed maximum size. Each operation performed in a function counts towards this maximum size. This maximum size is equivalent to:

- about 5,200 hashes on two fields
- about 2,600 hashes on four fields
- about `2^17` field multiplies
- about `2^17` field additions

If a program is too large to fit into these constraints, it can be broken up into multiple recursive proof verifications. See [Recursion](../snarkyjs/recursion).

## Merkle Trees

> You can use [Merkle trees](../snarkyjs-reference/classes/MerkleTree) to manage large amounts of data within a circuit. The power of Merkle trees is demonstrated in the [05-common-types-and-functions/src](https://github.com/o1-labs/docs2/tree/main/examples/zkapps/05-common-types-and-functions/src) reference project for this tutorial. See the [BasicMerkleTreeContract.ts](https://github.com/o1-labs/docs2/blob/main/examples/zkapps/05-common-types-and-functions/src/BasicMerkleTreeContract.ts) contract and [main.ts](https://github.com/o1-labs/docs2/blob/main/examples/zkapps/05-common-types-and-functions/src/main.ts).

Author: what does `main.ts` do with Merkle? we can describe

Reviewer: In `main.ts` we demonstrate how contracts interact with Merkle trees and how to construct them

> You can use [Merkle trees](../snarkyjs-reference/classes/MerkleTree) to manage large amounts of data within a circuit. The power of Merkle trees is demonstrated in the [05-common-types-and-functions/src](https://github.com/o1-labs/docs2/tree/main/examples/zkapps/05-common-types-and-functions/src) reference project for this tutorial. See the [BasicMerkleTreeContract.ts](https://github.com/o1-labs/docs2/blob/main/examples/zkapps/05-common-types-and-functions/src/BasicMerkleTreeContract.ts) contract and [main.ts](https://github.com/o1-labs/docs2/blob/main/examples/zkapps/05-common-types-and-functions/src/main.ts).

Author: ```suggestion
You can use [Merkle trees](../snarkyjs-reference/classes/MerkleTree) to manage large amounts of data within a circuit. The power of Merkle trees is demonstrated in the [05-common-types-and-functions/src](https://github.com/o1-labs/docs2/tree/main/examples/zkapps/05-common-types-and-functions/src) reference project for this tutorial. See the [BasicMerkleTreeContract.ts](https://github.com/o1-labs/docs2/blob/main/examples/zkapps/05-common-types-and-functions/src/BasicMerkleTreeContract.ts) contract and [main.ts](https://github.com/o1-labs/docs2/blob/main/examples/zkapps/05-common-types-and-functions/src/main.ts) that demonstrates how contracts interact with Merkle trees and how to construct them.
```

} from 'snarkyjs'
```

To create Merkle trees in your application:

```ts
const height = 20;
const tree = new MerkleTree(height);
```

The height variable determines how many leaves are available to the application. For example, a height of 20 leads to a tree with `2^(20-1)`, or 524,288 leaves.

> Merkle trees in smart contracts are stored as the hash of the Merkle tree's root. Smart contract methods that update the Merkle root can take a _witness_ of the change as an argument. The witness represents the Merkle path to the data for which inclusion is being proved.

Reviewer: yes! Would be good to link it

> Merkle trees in smart contracts are stored as the hash of the Merkle tree's root. Smart contract methods that update the Merkle root can take a _witness_ of the change as an argument. The witness represents the Merkle path to the data for which inclusion is being proved.

Author: ```suggestion
Merkle trees in smart contracts are stored as the hash of the Merkle tree's root. Smart contract methods that update the Merkle root can take a _witness_ of the change as an argument. The [MerkleMapWitness](/zkapps/snarkyjs-reference/classes/MerkleMapWitness) represents the Merkle path to the data for which inclusion is being proved.
```

  }
```

> The code to interact with the smart contract:

Author: by "it" do we mean "smart contract"?

);
```

In this example, leaves are fields. However, you can put more variables in a leaf by hashing an array of fields and setting a leaf to that hash.

This complete example is in the [project directory](https://github.com/o1-labs/docs2/tree/main/examples/zkapps/05-common-types-and-functions/src).

A more advanced example `LedgerContract` implements a basic ledger of tokens, including checks that the sender has signed their transaction and that the amount the sender has sent matches the amount the receiver receives.

## Merkle Map

> See the API reference documentation for [Merkle maps](../snarkyjs-reference/classes/MerkleMap). These allow us to implement key value stores.

Author: ```suggestion
See the API reference documentation for the [MerkleMap](../snarkyjs-reference/classes/MerkleMap) class you can use to implement key-value stores.
```
